<p>
    <strong>Reviewer #2 (Public Review):</strong>
</p>
<p>The work presented by Jordan and Keller aims at understanding the role of noradrenergic neuromodulation in the cortex of mice exploring a visual virtual environment. The authors hypothesized that norepinephrine released by Locus Coeruleus (LC) neurons in cortical circuits gates the plasticity of internal models following visuomotor prediction errors. To test this hypothesis, they devised clever experiments that allowed them to manipulate visual flow with respect to locomotion to create prediction errors in visuomotor coupling and measure the related signals in LC axons innervating the cortex using two-photon calcium imaging. They observed calcium responses proportional to absolute prediction errors that were non-specifically broadcast across the dorsal cortex. To understand how these signals contribute to computations performed by V1 neurons in layers 2/3, the authors activated LC noradrenergic inputs using optogenetic stimulations while imaging calcium responses in cortical neurons. Although LC activation had little impact on evoked activity related to visuomotor prediction errors, the authors observed changes in the effect of locomotion on visually evoked activity after repeated LC axons activation that were absent in control mice. Using a clever paradigm where the locomotion modulation index was measured in the same neurons before and after optogenetic manipulations, they confirmed that this plasticity depended on the density of LC axons activated, the visual flow associated with running, and the concurrent visuomotor coupling during LC activation. Based on similar locomotion modulation index dependency on speed observed in mice that develop only with visuomotor experience in the virtual environment, the authors concluded that changes in locomotion modulation index are the result of experience-dependent plasticity occurring at a much faster rate during LC axons optogenetic stimulations.</p>
<p>The study provides very compelling data on a timely and fascinating topic in neuroscience. The authors carefully designed experiments and corresponding controls to exclude any confounding factors in the interpretation of neuronal activity in LC axons and cortical neurons. The quality of the data and the rigor of the analysis are important strengths of the study. I believe this study will have an important contribution to the field of system neuroscience by shedding new light on the role of a key neuromodulator. The results provide strong support for the claims of the study. However, I also believe that some results could have been strengthened by providing additional analyses and experimental controls. These points are discussed below.</p>
<p>Calcium signals in LC axons tend to respond with pupil dilation, air puffs, and locomotion as the authors reported. A more quantitative analysis such as a GLM model could help understand the relative contribution (and temporal relationship) of these variables in explaining calcium signals. This could also help compare signals obtained in the sensory and motor cortical domains. Indeed, the comparison in Figure 2 seems a bit incomplete since only "posterior versus anterior" comparisons have been performed and not within-group comparisons. I believe it is hard to properly assess differences or similarities between calcium signal amplitude measured in different mice and cranial windows as they are subject to important variability (caused by different levels of viral expression for instance). The authors should at the very least provide a full statistical comparison between/within groups through a GLM model that would provide a more systematic quantification.</p>
<p>
    Previous studies using stimulations of the locus coeruleus or local iontophoresis of norepinephrine in sensory cortices have shown robust responses modulations (see McBurney-Lin et al., 2019, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.06.009">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.06.009</a>
    for a review). The weak modulations observed in this study seem at odds with these reports. Given that the density of ChrimsonR-expressing axons varies across mice and that there are no direct measurements of their activation (besides pupil dilation), it is difficult to appreciate how they impact the local network. How does the density of ChrimsonR-expressing axons compare to the actual density of LC axons in V1? The authors could further discuss this point.
</p>
<p>In the analysis performed in Figure 3, it seems that red light stimulations used to drive ChrimsonR also have an indirect impact on V1 neurons through the retina. Indeed, figure 3D shows a similar response profile for ChrimsonR and control with calcium signals increasing at laser onset (ON response) and offset (OFF response). With that in mind, it is hard to interpret the results shown in Figure 3E-F without seeing the average calcium time course for Control mice. Are the responses following visual flow caused by LC activation or additional visual inputs? The authors should provide additional information to clarify this result.</p>
<p>Some aspects of the described plasticity process remained unanswered. It is not clear over which time scale the locomotion modulation index changes and how many optogenetic stimulations are necessary or sufficient to saturate this index. Some of these questions could be addressed with the dataset of Figure 3 by measuring this index over different epochs of the imaging session (from early to late) to estimate the dynamics of the ongoing plasticity process (in comparison to control mice). Also, is there any behavioural consequence of plasticity/update of functional representation in V1? If plasticity gated by repeated LC activations reproduced visuomotor responses observed in mice that were exposed to visual stimulation only in the virtual environment, then I would expect to see a change in the locomotion behaviour (such as a change in speed distribution) as a result of the repeated LC stimulation. This would provide more compelling evidence for changes in internal models for visuomotor coupling in relation to its behavioural relevance. An experiment that could confirm the existence of the LC-gated learning process would be to change the gain of the visuomotor coupling and see if mice adapt faster with LC optogenetic activation compared to control mice with no ChrimsonR expression. Authors should discuss how they imagine the behavioural manifestation of this artificially-induced learning process in V1.</p>
<p>Finally, control mice used as a comparison to mice expressing ChrimsonR in Figure 3 were not injected with a control viral vector expressing a fluorescent protein alone. Although it is unlikely that the procedure of injection could cause the results observed, it would have been a better control for the interpretation of the results.</p>
